<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">wherein we see young maurice bewailing the
loss of his guardian angel, even in his
mistress's arms, and wherein we hear the
abbé patouille reject as vain and illusory
all notions of a new rebellion of the
angels</p>
			</header>

<p>a  FORTNIGHT had elapsed since
the angel's apparition in the flat.
For the first time Gilberte arrived
before Maurice at the rendezvous.
Maurice was gloomy, Gilberte sulky.
So far as they were concerned Nature had resumed
her drab monotony. They eyed each other languidly,
and kept glancing towards the angle between
the wardrobe with the mirror and the window,
where recently the pale shade of Arcade had taken
shape, and where now the blue cretonne of the
hangings was the only thing visible. Without
giving him a name (it was unnecessary) Madame des
Aubels asked:</p></div>

<p>"You have not seen him since?"</p>

<p>Slowly, sadly, Maurice turned his head from right
to left, and from left to right. </p>

<p>"You look as if you missed him," continued
Madame des Aubels. "But come, confess that he
gave you a terrible fright, and that you were shocked
at his unconventionally."</p>

<p>"Certainly he was unconventional," said Maurice
without any resentment.</p>

<p>"Tell me, Maurice, is it nothing to you now to
be with me alone?... You need an angel to inspire
you. That is sad, for a young man like you!"</p>

<p>Maurice appeared not to hear, and asked gravely:</p>

<p>"Gilberte, do you feel that your guardian angel
is watching over you?"</p>

<p>"I, not at all. I have never thought of him, and
yet I am not without religion. In the first place,
people who have none are like animals. And then
one cannot go straight without religion. It is impossible."</p>

<p>"Exactly, that's just it," said Maurice, his eyes
on the violet stripes of his flowerless pyjamas;
"when one has one's guardian angel one does not
even think about him, and when one has lost him
one feels very lonely."</p>

<p>"So you miss this...."</p>

<p>"Well, the fact is...."</p>

<p>"Oh, yes, yes, you miss him. Well, my dear, the
loss of such a guardian angel as that is no great
matter. No, no! he is not worth much, that Arcade
of yours. On that famous day, while you were out
getting him some clothes, he was ever so long
fastening my dress, and I certainly felt his hand....
Well, at any rate, don't trust him."</p>

<p>Maurice dreamily lit a cigarette. They spoke of
the six days' bicycle race at the winter velodrome,
and of the aviation show at the motor exhibition at
Brussels, without experiencing the slightest amusement.
Then they tried love-making as a sort of
convenient pastime, and succeeded in becoming
moderately absorbed in it; but at the very moment
when she might have been expected to play a part
more in accordance with a mutual sentiment, she
exclaimed with a sudden start:</p>

<p>"Good Heavens! Maurice, how stupid of you to
tell me that my guardian angel can see me. You cannot
imagine how uncomfortable the idea makes me."</p>

<p>Maurice, somewhat taken aback, recalled, a little
roughly, his mistress's wandering thoughts.</p>

<p>She declared that her principles forbade her to
think of playing a round game with angels.</p>

<p>Maurice was longing to see Arcade again and
had no other thought. He reproached himself
for suffering him to depart without discovering
where he was going, and he cudgelled his brains
night and day thinking how to find him again.</p>

<p>On the bare chance, he put a notice in the personal
column of one of the big papers, running thus:</p>

<p>"Arcade. Come back to your Maurice."</p>

<p>Day after day went by, and Arcade did not
return. </p>

<p>One morning, at seven o'clock, Maurice went to
St. Sulpice to hear Abbé Patouille say Mass, then,
as the priest was leaving the sacristy, he went up to
him and asked to be heard for a moment.</p>

<p>They descended the steps of the church together
and in the bright morning light walked round the
fountain of the <i>Quatre Évêques</i>. In spite of his
troubled conscience and the difficulty of presenting
so extraordinary a case with any degree of credibility,
Maurice related how the angel Arcade had appeared
to him and had announced his unhappy resolve to
separate from him and to stir up a new revolt of
the spirits of glory. And young d'Esparvieu asked
the worthy ecclesiastic how to find his celestial
guardian again, since he could not bear his absence,
and how to lead his angel back to the Christian
faith. Abbé Patouille replied in a tone of affectionate
sorrow that his dear child had been dreaming,
that he took a morbid hallucination for reality,
and that it was not permissible to believe that good
angels may revolt.</p>

<p>"People have a notion," he added, "that they
can lead a life of dissipation and disorder with
impunity. They are wrong. The abuse of pleasure
corrupts the intelligence and impairs the understanding.
The devil takes possession of the sinner's
senses, penetrating even to his soul. He has deceived
you, Maurice, by a clumsy artifice."</p>

<p>Maurice objected that he was not in any way a
victim of hallucinations, that he had not been
dreaming, that he had seen his guardian angel with
his eyes and heard him with his ears.</p>

<p>"Monsieur l'Abbé," he insisted, "a lady who
happened to be with me at the time,—I need not
mention her name,—also saw and heard him. And,
moreover, she felt the angel's fingers straying ...
well, anyhow, she felt them.... Believe me, Monsieur
l'Abbé, nothing could be more real, more
positively certain than this apparition. The angel
was fair, young, very handsome. His clear skin
seemed, in the shadow, as if bathed in milky light.
He spoke in a pure, sweet voice."</p>

<p>"That, alone, my child," the Abbé interrupted
quickly, "proves you were dreaming. According to
all the demonologies, bad angels have a hoarse voice,
which grates like a rusty lock, and even if they did
contrive to give a certain look of beauty to their
faces, they cannot succeed in imitating the pure
voice of the good spirits. This fact, attested by
numerous witnesses, is established beyond all
doubt."</p>

<p>"But, Monsieur l'Abbé, I saw him. I saw him
sit down, stark naked, in an arm-chair on a pair
of black stockings. What else do you want me to
tell you?"</p>

<p>The Abbé Patouille appeared in no way disturbed
by this announcement.</p>

<p>"I say once more, my son," he replied, "that
these unhappy illusions, these dreams of a deeply
troubled soul, are to be ascribed to the deplorable
state of your conscience. I believe, moreover, that
I can detect the particular circumstance that has
caused your unstable mind thus to come to grief.
During the winter in company with Monsieur
Sariette and your Uncle Gaétan, you came, in an
evil frame of mind, to see the Chapel of the Holy
Angels in this church, then undergoing repair. As
I observed on that occasion, it is impossible to keep
artists too closely to the rules of Christian art;
they cannot be too strongly enjoined to respect
Holy Writ and its authorized interpreters. Monsieur
Eugène Delacroix did not suffer his fiery
genius to be controlled by tradition. He brooked
no guidance and, here, in this chapel he has painted
pictures which in common parlance we call lurid,
compositions of a violent, terrible nature which,
far from inspiring the soul with peace, quietude,
and calm, plunge it into a state of agitation. In
them the angels are depicted with wrathful countenances,
their features are sombre and uncouth.
One might take them to be Lucifer and his companions
meditating their revolt. Well, my son, it
was these pictures, acting upon a mind already
weakened and undermined by every kind of dissipation,
that have filled it with the trouble to which it
is at present a prey."</p>

<p>But Maurice would have none of it. </p>

<p>"Oh, no! Monsieur l'Abbé," he cried, "it is
not Eugène Delacroix's pictures that have been
troubling me. I didn't so much as look at them. I
am completely indifferent to that kind of art."</p>

<p>"Well, then, my son, believe me: there is no
truth, no reality, in any of the story you have just
related to me. Your guardian angel has certainly
not appeared to you."</p>

<p>"But, Abbé," replied Maurice, who had the
most absolute confidence in the evidence of the
senses, "I saw him tying up a woman's shoe-laces
and putting on the trousers of a suicide."</p>

<p>And stamping his feet on the asphalt, Maurice
called as witnesses to the truth of his words the sky,
the earth, all nature, the towers of St. Sulpice,
the walls of the great seminary, the Fountain of the
<i>Quatre Évêques</i>, the public lavatory, the cabmen's
shelter, the taxis and motor 'buses' shelter, the
trees, the passers-by, the dogs, the sparrows, the
flower-seller and her flowers.</p>

<p>The Abbé made haste to end the interview.</p>

<p>"All this is error, falsehood, and illusion, my
child," said he. "You are a Christian: think as a
Christian,—a Christian does not allow himself to
be seduced by empty shadows. Faith protects him
against the seduction of the marvellous, he leaves
credulity to freethinkers. There are credulous
people for you—freethinkers! There is no humbug
they will not swallow. But the Christian carries a
weapon which dissipates diabolical illusions,—the
sign of the Cross. Reassure yourself, Maurice,—you
have not lost your guardian angel. He still
watches over you. It lies with you not to make
this task too difficult nor too painful for him. Good-bye,
Maurice. The weather is going to change, for
I feel a burning in my big toe."</p>

<p>And Abbé Patouille went off with his breviary
under his arm, hobbling along with a dignity that
seemed to foretell a mitre.</p>

<p>That very day, Arcade and Zita were leaning
over the parapet of La Butte, gazing down on the
mist and smoke that lay floating over the vast city.</p>

<p>"Is it possible," said Arcade, "for the mind
to conceive all the pain and suffering that lie pent
within a great city? It is my belief that if a man
succeeded in realising it, the weight of it would
crush him to the earth."</p>

<p>"And yet," answered Zita, "every living being
in that place of torment is enamoured of life. It is
a great enigma!</p>

<p>"Unhappy, ill-fated, while they live, the idea
of ceasing to be is, nevertheless, a horror to them.
They look not for solace in annihilation, it does not
even bring them the promise of rest. In their
madness they even look upon nothingness with
terror: they have peopled it with phantoms. Look
you at these pediments, these towers and domes
and spires that pierce the mist and rear on high
their glittering crosses. Men bow in adoration
before the demiurge who has given them a life that
is worse than death, and a death that is worse than
life."</p>

<p>Zita was for a long time lost in thought. At
length she broke silence, saying:</p>

<p>"There is something, Arcade, that I must confess
to you. It was no desire for a purer justice
or wiser laws that hurried Ithuriel earthward.
Ambition, a taste for intrigue, the love of wealth
and honour, all these things made Heaven, with its
calm, unbearable to me, and I longed to mingle
with the restless race of men. I came, and by an
art unknown to nearly all the angels, I learned how
to fashion myself a body which, since I could change
it as the fancy seized me, to whatsoever age and sex
I would, has permitted me to experience the most
diverse and amazing of human destinies. A hundred
times I took a position of renown among the leaders
of the day, the lords of wealth and princes of nations.
I will not reveal to you, Arcade, the famous
names I bore; know only that I was pre-eminent
in learning, in the fine arts, in power, wealth, and
beauty, among all the nations of the world. At
last, it was but a few years since, as I was journeying
in France, under the outward semblance of
a distinguished foreigner, I chanced to be roaming
at evening through the forest of Montmorency,
when I heard a flute unfolding all the sorrows of
Heaven. The purity and sadness of its notes rent
my very soul. Never before had I hearkened to
aught so lovely. My eyes were wet with tears, my
bosom full of sobs, as I drew near and beheld, on
the skirts of a glade, an old man like to a faun,
blowing on a rustic pipe. It was Nectaire. I cast
myself at his feet, imprinted kisses on his hands
and on his lips divine, and fled away....</p>

<p>"From that day forth, conscious of the littleness
of human achievements, weary of the tumult and
the vanity of earthly things, ashamed of my vast
and profitless endeavours, and deciding to seek out
a loftier aim for my ambition, I looked upwards
towards my skiey home and vowed I would return
to it as a Deliverer. I rid myself of titles, name,
wealth, friends, the horde of sycophants and flatterers
and, as Zita the obscure, set to work in
indigence and solitude, to bring freedom into
Heaven."</p>

<p>"And I," said Arcade, "I too have heard the
flute of Nectaire. But who is this old gardener
who can thus woo from a rude wooden pipe notes
that are so moving and so beautiful?"</p>

<p>"You will soon know," answered Zita.</p>



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
