<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">the gardener's story, continued</p>
			</header>

<p>wHEN men had learned to cultivate
the earth, to herd cattle, to enclose
their holy places within walls,
and to recognise the gods by their
beauty, I withdrew to that smiling
land girdled with dark woods and watered by the
Stymphalos, the Olbios, the Erymanthus, and the
proud Crathis, swollen with the icy waters of the
Styx, and there, in a green valley at the foot of a
hill planted with arbutus, olive, and pine, beneath
a cluster of white poplars and plane trees, by the
side of a stream flowing with soft murmur amid
tufted mastic trees, I sang to the shepherds and the
nymphs of the birth of the world, the origin of fire,
of the tenuous air, of water and of earth. I told
them how primeval men had lived wretched and
naked in the woods, before the ingenious spirits had
taught them the arts; of God, too, I sang to them,
and why they gave Dionysus Semele to mother,
because his desire to befriend mankind was born
amid the thunder.</p></div>

<p>"It was not without effort that this people, more
pleasing than all the others in the eyes of the gods,
these happy Greeks, achieved good government and
a knowledge of the arts. Their first temple was a
hut composed of laurel branches; their first image
of the gods, a tree; their first altar, a rough stone
stained with the blood of Iphigenia. But in a short
time they brought wisdom and beauty to a point
that no nation had attained before them, that no
nation has since approached. Whence comes it,
Arcade, this solitary marvel on the earth? Wherefore
did the sacred soil of Ionia and of Attica bring
forth this incomparable flower? Because nor priesthood,
nor dogma, nor revelation ever found a
place there, because the Greeks never knew the
jealous God.</p>

<p>"It was his own grace, his own genius that the
Greek enthroned and deified as his God, and when
he raised his eyes to the heavens it was his own
image that he saw reflected there. He conceived
everything in due measure; and to his temples he
gave perfect proportion. All therein was grace,
harmony, symmetry, and wisdom; all were worthy
of the immortals who dwelt within them and who
under names of happy choice, in realised shapes,
figured forth the genius of man. The columns
which bore the marble architrave, the frieze and
the cornice were touched with something human,
which made them venerable; and sometimes one
might see, as at Athens and at Delphi, beautiful
young girls strong-limbed and radiant upstaying the
entablature of treasure house and sanctuary. O days
of splendour, harmony, and wisdom!</p>

<p>"Dionysus resolved to repair to Italy, whither he
was summoned under the name of Bacchus by a
people eager to celebrate his mysteries. I took
passage in his ship decked with tendrils of the vine,
and landed under the eyes of the two brothers of
Helen at the mouth of the yellow Tiber. Already
under the teaching of the god, the inhabitants of
Latium had learned to wed the vine to the young
stripling elm. It was my pleasure to dwell at the
foot of the Sabine hills in a valley crowned with
trees and watered with pure springs. I gathered
the verbena and the mallow in the meadows. The
pale olive-trees twisting their perforated trunks on
the slope of the hill gave me of their unctuous fruit.
There I taught a race of men with square heads,
who had not, like the Greeks, a fertile mind, but
whose hearts were true, whose souls were patient,
and who reverenced the gods. My neighbour, a
rustic soldier, who for fifteen years had bowed
under the burden of his haversack, had followed
the Roman eagle over land and sea, and had seen
the enemies of the sovereign people flee before him.
Now he drove his furrow with his two red oxen,
starred with white between their spreading horns,
while beneath the cabin's thatch his spouse, chaste
and sedate of mien, pounded garlic in a bronze
mortar and cooked the beans upon the sacred hearth,
And I, his friend, seated near by under an oak, used
to lighten his labours with the sound of my flute, and
smile on his little children, when the sun, already
low in the sky, was lengthening the shadows, and
they returned from the wood all laden with branches.
At the garden gate where the pears and pumpkins
ripened, and where the lily and the evergreen
acanthus bloomed, a figure of Priapus carved out
of the trunk of a fig tree menaced thieves with his
formidable emblem, and the reeds swaying with the
wind over his head scared away the plundering birds.
At new moon the pious husbandman made offering
of a handful of salt and barley to his household
gods crowned with myrtle and with rosemary.</p>

<p>"I saw his children grow up, and his children's
children, who kept in their hearts their early piety
and did not forget to offer sacrifice to Bacchus, to
Diana, and to Venus, nor omit to pour fresh wines
and scatter flowers into the fountains. But slowly
they fell away from their old habits of patient toil
and simplicity.</p>

<p>"I heard them complain when the torrent,
swollen with many rains, compelled them to construct
a dyke to protect the paternal fields, and the
rough Sabine wine grew unpleasing to their delicate
palate. They went to drink the wines of Greece at
the neighbouring tavern; and the hours slipped
unheeded by, while within the arbour shade they
watched the dance of the flute player, practised at
swaying her supple limbs to the sound of the castanets.</p>

<p>"Lulled by murmuring leaves and whispering
streams, the tillers of the soil took sweet repose, but
between the poplars we saw along borders of the
sacred way vast tombs, statues, and altars arise, and
the rolling of the chariot wheels grew more frequent
over the worn stones. A cherry sapling brought
home by a veteran told us of the far-distant conquests
of a Consul, and odes sung to the lyre
related the victories of Rome, mistress of the
world.</p>

<p>"All the countries where the great Dionysus had
journeyed, changing wild beasts into men, and
making the fruit and grain bloom and ripen beneath
the passing of his Mænads, now breathed the Pax
Romana. The nursling of the she-wolf, soldier and
labourer, friend of conquered nations, laid out roads
from the margin of the misty sea to the rocky slopes
of the Caucasus; in every town rose the temple of
Augustus and of Rome, and such was the universal
faith in Latin justice that in the gorges of Thessaly
or on the wooded borders of the Rhine, the slave,
ready to succumb under his iniquitous burden,
called aloud on the name of Cæsar.</p>

<p>"But why must it be that on this ill-starred globe
of land and water, all should perish and die and the
fairest things be ever the most fleeting? O adorable
daughters of Greece! O Science! O Wisdom! O
Beauty! kindly divinities, you were wrapt in heavy
slumber ere you submitted to the outrages of the
barbarians, who already in the marshy wastes of the
North and on the lonely steppes, ready to assail you,
bestrode bare-backed their little shaggy horses.</p>

<p>"While, dear Arcade, the patient legionary
camped by the borders of the Phasis and the Tanais,
the women and the priests of Asia and of monstrous
Africa invaded the Eternal City and troubled the
sons of Remus with their magic spells. Until now,
Iahveh, the persecutor of the laborious demons,
was unknown to the world that he pretended to
have created, save to certain miserable Syrian tribes,
ferocious like himself, and perpetually dragged from
servitude to servitude. Profiting by the Roman
peace which assured free travel and traffic everywhere,
and favoured the exchange of ideas and
merchandise, this old God insolently made ready to
conquer the Universe. He was not the only one,
for the matter of that, to attempt such an undertaking.
At the same time a crowd of gods, demiurges,
and demons, such as Mithra, Thammuz, the good
Isis, and Eubulus, meditated taking possession of
the peace-enfolded world. Of all the spirits, Iahveh
appeared the least prepared for victory. His
ignorance, his cruelty, his ostentation, his Asiatic
luxury, his disdain of laws, his affectation of rendering
himself invisible, all these things were calculated
to offend those Greeks and Latins who had absorbed
the teaching of Dionysus and the Muses. He himself
felt he was incapable of winning the allegiance of
free men and of cultivated minds, and he employed
cunning. To seduce their souls he invented a fable
which, although not so ingenious as the myths
wherewith we have surrounded the spirits of our
disciples of old, could, nevertheless, influence those
feebler intellects which are to be found everywhere
in great masses. He declared that men having
committed a crime against him, an hereditary
crime, should pay the penalty for it in their present
life and in the life to come (for mortals vainly
imagine that their existence is prolonged in hell);
and the astute Iahveh gave out that he had sent his
own son to earth to redeem with his blood the debt
of mankind. It is not credible that a penalty should
redress a fault, and it is still less credible that the
innocent should pay for the guilty. The sufferings
of the innocent atone for nothing, and do but add
one evil to another. Nevertheless, unhappy creatures
were found to adore Iahveh and his son, the expiator,
and to announce their mysteries as good
tidings. We should not be surprised at this folly.
Have we not seen many times indeed human beings
who, poor and naked, prostrate themselves before
all the phantoms of fear, and rather than follow the
teaching of well-disposed demons, obey the commandments
of cruel demiurges? Iahveh, by his
cunning, took souls as in a net. But he did not
gain therefrom, for his glorification, all that he
expected. It was not he, but his son, who received
the homage of mankind, and who gave his name to
the new cult. He himself remained almost unknown
upon earth."</p>



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
