<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">wherein is begun the gardener's story, in the
course of which we shall see the destiny
of the world unfolded in a discourse as
broad and magnificent in its views as
bossuet's discourse on the history of the
universe is narrow and dismal</p>
			</header>

<p>tHE gardener bade Arcade and Zita
sit down in an arbour walled with
wild bryony, at the far end of the
orchard.</p>

<p>"Arcade," said the beautiful Archangel,
"Nectaire will perhaps reveal to you to-day
the things you are burning to know. Ask him to
speak."</p>

<p>Arcade did so and old Nectaire, laying down his
pipe, began as follows:—</p></div>

<p>"I knew him. He was the most beautiful of all
the Seraphim. He shone with intelligence and
daring. His great heart was big with all the virtues
born of pride: frankness, courage, constancy in trial,
indomitable hope. Long, long ago, ere Time was,
in the boreal sky where gleam the seven magnetic
stars, he dwelt in a palace of diamond and gold,
where the air was ever tremulous with the beating
of wings and with songs of triumph. Iahveh, on
his mountain, was jealous of Lucifer. You both
know it: angels like unto men feel love and hatred
quicken within them. Capable, at times, of generous
resolves, they too often follow their own interests
and yield to fear. Then, as now, they showed themselves,
for the most part, incapable of lofty thoughts,
and in the fear of the Lord lay their sole virtue.
Lucifer, who held vile things in proud disdain,
despised this rabble of commonplace spirits for ever
wallowing in a life of feasts and pleasure. But to
those who were possessed of a daring spirit, a restless
soul, to those fired with a wild love of liberty, he
proffered friendship, which was returned with
adoration. These latter deserted in a mass the
mountain of God and yielded to the Seraph the
homage which That Other would fain have kept for
himself alone.</p>

<p>"I ranked among the Dominations, and my name,
Alaciel, was not unknown to fame. To satisfy my
mind—that was ever tormented with an insatiable
thirst for knowledge and understanding—I observed
the nature of things, I studied the properties of
minerals, air, and water. I sought out the laws which
govern nature, solid or ethereal, and after much
pondering I perceived that the Universe had not
been formed as its pretended Creator would have
us believe; I knew that all that exists, exists of
itself and not by the caprice of Iahveh; that the
world is itself its own creator and the spirit its own
God. Henceforth I despised Iahveh for his imposture,
and I hated him because he showed himself
to be opposed to all that I found desirable and good:
liberty, curiosity, doubt. These feelings drew me
towards the Seraph. I admired him, I loved him.
I dwelt in his light. When at length it appeared
that a choice had to be made between him and That
Other I ranged myself on the side of Lucifer and
knew no other aim than to serve him, no other desire
than to share his lot.</p>

<p>"War having become inevitable, he prepared for
it with indefatigable vigilance and all the resourcefulness
of a far-seeing mind. Making the Thrones
and Dominations into Chalybes and Cyclopes, he
drew forth iron from the mountains bordering his
domain; iron, which he valued more than gold,
and forged weapons in the caverns of Heaven.
Then in the desert plain of the North he assembled
myriads of Spirits, armed them, taught them, and
drilled them. Although prepared in secret, the
enterprise was too vast for his adversary not to be
soon aware of it. It might in truth be said that
he had always foreseen and dreaded it, for he had
made a citadel of his abode and a warlike host of
his angels, and he gave himself the name of the God
of Hosts. He made ready his thunderbolts. More
than half of the children of Heaven remained
faithful to him; thronging round him he beheld
obedient souls and patient hearts. The Archangel
Michael, who knew not fear, took command of
these docile troops. Lucifer, as soon as he saw that
his army could gain no more in numbers or in
warlike skill, moved it swiftly against the foe, and
promising his angels riches and glory marched at
their head towards the mountain upon whose
summit stands the Throne of the Universe. For
three days our host swept onward over the ethereal
plains. Above our heads streamed the black standards
of revolt. And now, behold, the Mountain
of God shone rosy in the orient sky and our
chief scanned with his eyes the glittering ramparts.
Beneath the sapphire walls the foe was drawn up in
battle array, and, while we marched clad in our iron
and bronze, they shone resplendent in gold and
precious stones.</p>

<p>"Their gonfalons of red and blue floated in the
breeze, and lightning flashed from the points of
their lances. In a little while the armies were only
sundered one from the other by a narrow strip of
level and deserted ground, and at this sight even
the bravest shuddered as they thought that there
in bloody conflict their fate would soon be sealed.</p>

<p>"Angels, as you know, never die. But when
bronze and iron, diamond point or flaming sword
tear their ethereal substance, the pain they feel is
more acute than men may suffer, for their flesh is
more exquisitely delicate; and should some essential
organ be destroyed, they fall inert and, slowly decomposing,
are resolved into clouds and during long
æons float insensible in the cold ether. And when
at length they resume spirit and form they fail to
recover full memory of their past life. Therefore
it is but natural that angels shrink from suffering,
and the bravest among them is troubled at the
thought of being reft of light and sweet remembrance.
Were it otherwise the angelic race would
know neither the delight of battle nor the glory of
sacrifice. Those who, before the beginning of
Time, fought in the Empyrean for or against the
God of Armies, would have taken part without
honour in mock battles, and it would not now become
me to say to you, my children, with rightful pride:</p>

<p>"'Lo, I was there!'</p>

<p>"Lucifer gave the signal for the onset and led
the assault. We fell upon the enemy, thinking to
destroy him then and there and carry the sacred
citadel at the first onslaught. The soldiers of the
jealous God, less fiery, but no whit less firm than
ours, remained immovable. The Archangel Michael
commanded them with the calmness and resolution
of a mighty spirit. Thrice we strove to break
through their lines, thrice they opposed to our ironclad
breast the flaming points of their lances, swift
to pierce the stoutest cuirass. In millions the
glorious bodies fell. At length our right wing
pierced the enemy's left and we beheld the Principalities,
the Powers, the Virtues, the Dominations,
and the Thrones turn and flee in full career; while
the Angels of the Third Choir, flying distractedly
above them, covered them with a snow of feathers
mingled with a rain of blood. We sped in pursuit
of them amid the débris of chariots and broken
weapons, and we spurred their nimble flight. Suddenly
a storm of cries amazed us. It grew louder
and nearer. With desperate shrieks and triumphal
clamour the right wing of the enemy, the giant
archangels of the Most High, had flung themselves
upon our left flank and broken it. Thus
we were forced to abandon the pursuit of the fugitives
and hasten to the rescue of our own shattered
troops. Our prince flew to rally them, and
re-established the conflict. But the left wing of
the enemy, whose ruin he had not quite consummated,
no longer pressed by lance or arrow, regained
courage, returned, and faced us yet again.
Night fell upon the dubious field. While under the
shelter of darkness, in the still, silent air stirred ever
and anon by the moans of the wounded, his forces
were resting from their toils, Lucifer began to make
ready for the next day's battle. Before dawn the
trumpets sounded the reveille. Our warriors surprised
the enemy at the hour of prayer, put them
to rout, and long and fierce was the carnage that
ensued. When all had either fallen or fled, the
Archangel Michael, none with him save a few
companions with four wings of flame, still resisted
the onslaughts of a countless host. They fell back
ceaselessly opposing their breasts to us, and Michael
still displayed an impassible countenance. The sun
had run a third of its course when we commenced
to scale the Mountain of God. An arduous ascent
it was: sweat ran from our brows, a dazzling light
blinded us. Weighed down with steel, our feathery
wings could not sustain us, but hope gave us wings
that bore us up. The beautiful Seraph, pointing
with glittering hand, mounting ever higher and
higher, showed us the way. All day long we slowly
clomb the lofty heights which at evening were
robed in azure, rose, and violet. The starry host
appearing in the sky seemed as the reflection of our
own arms. Infinite silence reigned above us. We
went on, intoxicated with hope; all at once from
the darkened sky lightning darted forth, the thunder
muttered, and from the cloudy mountain-top
fell fire from Heaven. Our helmets, our breast-plates
were running with flames, and our bucklers
broke under bolts sped by invisible hands. Lucifer,
in the storm of fire, retained his haughty mien.
In vain the lightning smote him; mightier than
ever he stood erect, and still defied the foe. At
length, the thunder, making the mountain totter,
flung us down pell-mell, huge fragments of sapphire
and ruby crashing down with us as we fell,
and we rolled inert, swooning, for a period whose
duration none could measure.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"I awoke in a darkness filled with lamentations.
And when my eyes had grown accustomed to the
dense shadows I saw round me my companions in
arms, scattered in thousands on the sulphurous
ground, lit by fitful gleams of livid light. My
eyes perceived but fields of lava, smoking craters,
and poisonous swamps.</p>

<p>"Mountains of ice and shadowy seas shut in the
horizon. A brazen sky hung heavy on our brows.
And the horror of the place was such that we wept
as we sat, crouched elbow on knee, our cheeks
resting on our clenched hands.</p>

<p>"But soon, raising my eyes, I beheld the Seraph
standing before me like a tower. Over his pristine
splendour sorrow had cast its mantle of sombre
majesty.</p>

<p>"'Comrades,' said he, 'we must be happy and
rejoice, for behold we are delivered from celestial
servitude. Here we are free, and it were better to
be free in Hell than serve in Heaven. We are not
conquered, since the will to conquer is still ours.
We have caused the Throne of the jealous God to
totter; by our hands it shall fall. Arise, therefore,
and be of good heart.'</p>

<p>"Thereupon, at his command, we piled mountain
upon mountain and on the topmost peak we reared
engines which flung molten rocks against the divine
habitations. The celestial host was taken unaware
and from the abodes of glory there issued groans
and cries of terror. And even then we thought to
re-enter in triumph on our high estate, but the
Mountain of God was wreathed with lightnings,
and thunderbolts, falling on our fortress, crushed
it to dust. After this fresh disaster, the Seraph
remained awhile in meditation, his head buried in
his hands. At length he raised his darkened visage.
Now he was Satan, greater than Lucifer. Steadfast
and loyal the angels thronged about him.</p>

<p>"'Friends,' he said, 'if victory is denied us now,
it is because we are neither worthy nor capable of
victory. Let us determine wherein we have failed.
Nature shall not be ruled, the sceptre of the Universe
shall not be grasped, Godhead shall not be won, save
by knowledge alone. We must conquer the thunder;
to that task we must apply ourselves unwearyingly.
It is not blind courage (no one this day has shown
more courage than have you) which will win us the
courts of Heaven; but rather study and reflection.
In these silent realms where we are fallen, let us
meditate, seeking the hidden causes of things; let
us observe the course of Nature; let us pursue her
with compelling ardour and all-conquering desire;
let us strive to penetrate her infinite grandeur, her
infinite minuteness. Let us seek to know when she
is barren and when she brings forth fruit; how she
makes cold and heat, joy and sorrow, life and death;
how she assembles and disperses her elements, how
she produces both the light air we breathe and the
rocks of diamond and sapphire whence we have
been precipitated, the divine fire wherewith we
have been scarred and the soaring thought which
stirs our minds. Torn with dire wounds, scorched
by flame and by ice, let us render thanks to Fate
which has sedulously opened our eyes, and let us
rejoice at our lot. It is through pain that, suffering
a first experience of Nature, we have been roused
to know her and to subdue her. When she obeys us
we shall be as gods. But even though she hide her
mysteries for ever from us, deny us arms and keep
the secret of the thunder, we still must needs congratulate
ourselves on having known pain, for pain
has revealed to us new feelings, more precious
and more sweet than those experienced in eternal
bliss, and inspired us with love and pity unknown
to Heaven.'</p>

<p>"These words of the Seraph changed our hearts
and opened up fresh hope to us. Our hearts
were filled with a great longing for knowledge and
love.</p>

<p>"Meanwhile the Earth was coming into being.
Its immense and nebulous orb took on hourly more
shape and more certainty of outline. The waters
which fed the seaweed, the madrepores and shellfish
and bore the light flotilla of the nautilus upon
their bosom, no longer covered it in its entirety;
they began to sink into beds, and already continents
appeared, where, on the warm slime, amphibious
monsters crawled. Then the mountains were overspread
with forests, and divers races of animals
commenced to feed on the grass, the moss, the
berries on the trees, and on the acorns. Then there
took possession of cavernous shelters under the rocks,
a being who was cunning to wound with a sharpened
stone the savage beasts, and by his ruses to overcome
the ancient denizens of forest, plain, and mountain.</p>

<p>"Man entered painfully on his kingdom. He was
defenceless and naked. His scanty hair afforded him
but little protection from the cold. His hands
ended in nails too frail to do battle with the claws
of wild beasts, but the position of his thumb, in
opposition to the rest of his fingers, allowed him
easily to grasp the most diverse objects and endowed
him with skill in default of strength. Without
differing essentially from the rest of the animals,
he was more capable than any others of observing
and comparing. As he drew from his throat various
sounds, it occurred to him to designate by a particular
inflexion of the voice whatever impinged
upon his mind, and by this sequence of different
sounds he was enabled to fix and communicate his
ideas. His miserable lot and his painstaking spirit
aroused the sympathy of the vanquished angels,
who discerned in him an audacity equalling their
own, and the germ of the pride that was at once
their glory and their bane. They came in large
numbers to be near him, to dwell on this young
earth whither their wings wafted them in effortless
flight. And they took pleasure in sharpening his
talents and fostering his genius. They taught him
to clothe himself in the skins of wild beasts, to roll
stones before the mouths of caves to keep out
the tigers and bears. They taught him how to make
the flame burst forth by twirling a stick among
the dried leaves and to foster the sacred fire upon
the hearth. Inspired by the ingenious spirits he
dared to cross the rivers in the hollowed trunks of
cleft trees, he invented the wheel, the grinding-mill,
and the plough; the share tore up the earth and the
wound brought forth fruit, and the grain offered to
him who ground it divine nourishment. He moulded
vessels in clay, and out of the flint he fashioned
various tools.</p>

<p>"In fine, taking up our abode among mankind,
we consoled them and taught them. We were not
always visible to them, but of an evening, at the
turn of the road, we would appear to them under
forms often strange and weird, at times dignified
and charming, and we adopted at will the appearance
of a monster of the woods and waters, of a venerable
old man, of a beautiful child, or of a woman with
broad hips. Sometimes we would mock them in
our songs or test their intelligence by some cunning
prank. There were certain of us of a rather turbulent
humour who loved to tease their women and
children, but though lowly folk, they were our
brothers, and we were never loath to come to their
aid. Through our care their intelligence developed
sufficiently to attain to mistaken ideas, and to
acquire erroneous notions of the relations of cause
and effect. As they supposed that some magic bond
existed between the reality and its counterfeit
presentment, they covered the walls of their caves
with figures of animals and carved in ivory images
of the reindeer and the mammoth in order to
secure as prey the creatures they represented.
Centuries passed by with infinite slowness while
their genius was coming to birth. We sent them
happy thoughts in dreams, inspired them to tame
the horse, to castrate the bull, to teach the dog to
guard the sheep. They created the family and the
tribe. It came to pass one day that one of their
wandering tribes was assailed by ferocious hunters.
Forthwith the young men of the tribe formed an
enclosed ring with their chariots, and in it they
shut their women, children, old people, cattle, and
treasures, and from the platform of their chariots
they hurled murderous stones at their assailants.
Thus was formed the first city. Born in misery and
condemned to do murder by the law of Iahveh, man
put his whole heart into doing battle, and to war he
was indebted for his noblest virtues. He hallowed
with his blood that sacred love of country which
should (if man fulfils his destiny to the very end)
enfold the whole earth in peace. One of us, Dædalus,
brought him the axe, the plumb-line, and the
sail. Thus we rendered the existence of mortals less
hard and difficult. By the shores of the lakes they
built dwellings of osier, where they might enjoy a
meditative quiet unknown to the other inhabitants
of the earth, and when they had learned to appease
their hunger without too painful efforts we breathed
into their hearts the love of beauty.</p>

<p>"They raised up pyramids, obelisks, towers,
colossal statues which smiled stiff and uncouth, and
genetic symbols. Having learnt to know us or
trying at least to divine what manner of beings we
were, they felt both friendship and fear for us.
The wisest among them watched us with sacred awe
and pondered our teaching. In their gratitude the
people of Greece and of Asia consecrated to us
stones, trees, shadowy woods; offered us victims,
and sang us hymns; in fact we became gods in their
sight, and they called us Horus, Isis, Astarte, Zeus,
Cybele, Demeter, and Triptolemus. Satan was
worshipped under the names of Evan, Dionysus,
Iacchus, and Lenæus. He showed in his various
manifestations all the strength and beauty which
it is given to mortals to conceive. His eyes had the
sweetness of the wood-violet, his lips were brilliant
with the ruby-red of the pomegranate, a down finer
than the velvet of the peach covered his cheeks and
his chin: his fair hair, wound like a diadem and
knotted loosely on the crown of his head, was encircled
with ivy. He charmed the wild beasts, and
penetrating into the deep forests drew to him all
wild spirits, every thing that climbed in trees and
peered through the branches with wild and timid gaze.
On all these creatures fierce and fearful, that lived
on bitter berries and beneath whose hairy breasts a
wild heart beat, half-human creatures of the woods—on
all he bestowed loving-kindness and grace, and
they followed him drunk with joy and beauty. He
planted the vine and showed mortals how to crush
the grapes underfoot to make the wine flow. Magnificent
and benign, he fared across the world, a
long procession following in his train. To bear
him company I took the form of a satyr; from my
brow sprang two budding horns. My nose was flat
and my ears were pointed. Glands, like those of the
goat, hung on my neck, a goat's tail moved with my
moving loins, and my hairy legs ended in a black
cloven hoof which beat the ground in cadence.</p>

<p>"Dionysus fared on his triumphal march over
the world. In his company I passed through Lydia,
the Phrygian fields, the scorching plains of Persia,
Media bristling with hoar-frost, Arabia Felix, and
rich Asia where flourishing cities were laved by the
waves of the sea. He proceeded on a car drawn by
lions and lynxes, to the sound of flutes, cymbals, and
drums, invented for his mysteries. Bacchantes,
Thyades, and Mænads, girt with the dappled fawn-skin,
waved the thyrsus encircled with ivy. He bore
in his train the Satyrs, whose joyous troop I led,
Sileni, Pans, and Centaurs. Under his feet flowers
and fruit sprang to life, and striking the rocks with
his wand he made limpid streams gush forth. In
the month of the Vintage he visited Greece, and
the villagers ran forth to meet him, stained with the
green and ruddy juices of the plants, they wore
masks of wood, or bark, or leaves; in their hands
they bore earthen cups, and danced wanton dances.
Their womenfolk, imitating the companions of the
God, their heads wreathed with green smilax,
fastened round their supple loins skins of fawn or
goat. The virgins twined about their throats
garlands of fig leaves, they kneaded cakes of flour,
and bore the Phallus in the mystic basket. And the
vine-dressers, all daubed with lees of wine, standing
up in their wains and bandying mockery or abuse
with the passers-by, invented Tragedy.</p>

<p>"Truly, it was not in dreaming beside a fountain,
but by dint of strenuous toil that Dionysus taught
them to grow plants and to make them bring forth
succulent fruits. And while he pondered the art
of transforming the rough woodlanders into a race
that should love music and submit to just laws,
more than once over his brow, burning with the fire
of enthusiasm, did melancholy and gloomy fever
pass. But his profound knowledge and his friendship
for mankind enabled him to triumph over
every obstacle. O days divine! Beautiful dawn of
life! We led the Bacchanals on the leafy summits
of the mountains and on the yellow shores of the
seas. The Naiads and the Oreads mingled with us
at our play. Aphrodite at our coming rose from
the foam of the sea to smile upon us."</p>



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
