<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">wherein we see how the angel, having become
a man, behaves like a man, coveting
another's wife and betraying his friend.
in this chapter the correctness of young
d'esparvieu's conduct will be made manifest</p>
			</header>

<p>tHE angel was pleased with his lodging.
He worked of a morning,
went out in the afternoon, heedless
of detectives, and came home to
sleep. As in days gone by, Maurice
received Madame des Aubels twice or thrice a
week in the room in which they had seen the apparition.</p></div>

<p>All went very well until one morning Gilberte,
having, the night before, left her little velvet bag
on the table in the blue room, came to find it, and
discovered Arcade stretched on the couch in his
pyjamas, smoking a cigarette, and dreaming of the
conquest of Heaven. She gave a loud scream.</p>

<p>"You, Monsieur! Had I thought to find you
here, you may be quite sure I should not ... I
came to fetch my little bag, which is in the next
room. Allow me...." And she slipped past the
angel, cautiously and quickly, as if he were a brazier.</p>

<p>Madame des Aubels that morning, in her pale
green tailor-made costume, was deliciously attractive.
Her tight skirt displayed her movements, and her
every step was one of those miracles of Nature
which fill men's hearts with amazement.</p>

<p>She reappeared, bag in hand.</p>

<p>"Once more—I ask your pardon.... I never
dreamt that...."</p>

<p>Arcade begged her to sit down and to stay a
moment.</p>

<p>"I never expected, Monsieur," said she, "that
you would be doing the honours of this flat. I knew
how dearly Monsieur d'Esparvieu loved you....
Nevertheless, I had no idea that...."</p>

<p>The sky had suddenly grown overcast. A brownish
glare began to steal into the room. Madame des
Aubels told him she had walked for her health's
sake, but a storm was brewing, and she asked if a
carriage could be called for her.</p>

<p>Arcade flung himself at Gilberte's feet, took her
in his arms as one takes a precious piece of china,
and murmured words which, being meaningless in
themselves, expressed desire.</p>

<p>She put her hands over his eyes and on his lips,
and exclaimed, "I hate you!"</p>

<p>And shaking with sobs, she asked for a drink of
water. She was choking. The angel went to her
assistance. In this moment of extreme peril she
defended herself courageously. She kept saying:
"No!... No!... I will not love you. I should
love you too well...." Nevertheless she succumbed.</p>

<p>In the sweet familiarity which followed their
mutual astonishment she said to him:</p>

<p>"I have often asked after you. I knew that you
were an assiduous frequenter of the playhouses at
Montmartre,—that you were often seen with Mademoiselle
Bouchotte, who, nevertheless, is not at all
pretty. I knew that you had become very smart,
and that you were making a good deal of money.
I was not surprised. You were born to succeed.
The day of your"—and she pointed at the spot
between the window and the wardrobe with the
mirror—"apparition, I was vexed with Maurice
for having given you a suicide's rags to wear. You
pleased me.... Oh, it was not your good looks!
Don't think that women are as sensitive as
people say to outward attractions. We consider
other things in love. There is a sort of—— Well,
anyhow I loved you as soon as I saw
you."</p>

<p>The shadows grew deeper.</p>

<p>She asked:</p>

<p>"You are not an angel, are you? Maurice
believes you are; but he believes so many things,
Maurice." She questioned Arcade with her eyes
and smiled maliciously. "Confess that you have
been fooling him, and that you are no angel?"</p>

<p>Arcade replied:</p>

<p>"I only aspire to please you; I will always be
what you want me to be."</p>

<p>Gilberte decided that he was no angel; first,
because one never is an angel; secondly, for more
detailed reasons which drew her thoughts to the
question of love. He did not argue the matter
with her, and once again words were found inadequate
to express their feelings.</p>

<p>Outside, the rain was falling thick and fast, the
windows were streaming, lightning lit up the muslin
curtains, and thunder shook the panes. Gilberte
made the sign of the Cross and remained with her
head hidden in her lover's bosom.</p>

<p>At this moment Maurice entered the room. He
came in wet and smiling, confident, tranquil, happy,
to announce to Arcade the good news that with
his half-share in the previous day's race at Longchamps
the angel had won twelve times his stake.
Surprising the lady and the angel in their embrace,
he became furious; anger gripped the muscles
of his throat, his face grew red with blood, and
the veins stood out on his forehead. He sprang
with clenched fists towards Gilberte, and then suddenly
stopped.</p>

<p>Interrupted motion was transformed into heat.
Maurice fumed. His anger did not arm him, like
Archilochus, with lyrical vengeance. He merely
applied an offensive epithet to his unfaithful one.</p>

<p>Meanwhile she had recovered her dignified bearing.
She rose, full of modesty and grace, and gave
her accuser a look which expressed both offended
virtue and loving forgiveness.</p>

<p>But as young d'Esparvieu continued to shower
coarse and monotonous insults on her, she grew
angry in her turn.</p>

<p>"You are a pretty sort of person, are you not?"
she said. "Did I run after this Arcade of yours?
It was you who brought him here, and in what a
state, too! You had only one idea: to give me up
to your friend. Well, Monsieur, you can do as you
like—I am not going to oblige you."</p>

<p>Maurice d'Esparvieu replied simply, "Get out
of it, you trollop!" And he made a motion as if to
push her out. It pained Arcade to see his mistress
treated so disrespectfully, but he thought he lacked
the necessary authority to interfere with Maurice.
Madame des Aubels, who had lost none of her
dignity, fixed young d'Esparvieu with her imperious
gaze, and said:</p>

<p>"Go and get me a carriage."</p>

<p>And so great is the power of woman over a well-bred
soul, in a gallant nation, that the young Frenchman
went immediately and told the concierge
to call a taxi. Madame des Aubels, with a
studied exhibition of charm in every movement,
took leave of them, throwing Maurice the contemptuous
look that a woman owes to him whom
she has deceived. Maurice witnessed her departure
with an outward expression of indifference he was
far from feeling. Then he turned to the angel clad
in the flowered pyjamas which Maurice himself
had worn the day of the apparition; and this
circumstance, trifling in itself, added fuel to the
anger of the host who had been thus shamefully
deceived.</p>

<p>"Well," he said, "you may pride yourself on
being a despicable individual. You have behaved
basely, and all for nothing. If the woman took
your fancy, you had but to tell me. I was tired of
her. I had had enough of her. I would have
willingly left her to you."</p>

<p>He spoke thus to hide his pain, for he loved Gilberte
more than ever, and the creature's treachery
caused him great suffering. He pursued:</p>

<p>"I was about to ask you to take her off my hands.
But you have followed your lower nature—you have
behaved like a sweep."</p>

<p>If at this solemn moment Arcade had but spoken
one word from his heart, Maurice would have
burst into tears, and forgiven his friend and his
mistress, and all three would have become content
and happy once again. But Arcade had not
been nourished on the milk of human kindness.
He had never suffered, and did not know how to
sympathise with suffering. He replied with frigid
wisdom:</p>

<p>"My dear Maurice, that same necessity which
orders and constrains the actions of living beings,
produces effects that are often unexpected, and
sometimes absurd. Thus it is that I have been led
to displease you. You would not reproach me if
you had a good philosophical understanding of
nature; for you would then know that free-will is
but an illusion, and that physiological affinities are
as exactly determined as are chemical combinations,
and, like them, may be summed up in a formula.
I think that, in your case, it might be possible to
inculcate these truths, but it would be a difficult
task, and maybe they would not bring you the
serenity which eludes you. It is fitting, therefore,
that I should leave this spot, and——"</p>

<p>"Stay," said Maurice.</p>

<p>Maurice had a very clear sense of social obligations.
He put honour, when he thought about it, above
everything. So now he told himself very forcibly
that the outrage he had suffered could only be
wiped out with blood. This traditional idea
instantly lent an unexpected nobility to his speech
and bearing.</p>

<p>"It is I, Monsieur," said he, "who will quit this
place, never to return. You will remain here,
since you are a refugee. My seconds will wait
upon you." </p>

<p>The angel smiled.</p>

<p>"I will receive them, if it gives you pleasure,
but, bethink you, my dear Maurice, I am invulnerable.
Celestial spirits even when they are
materialised cannot be touched by point of sword
or pistol shot. Consider, my dear Maurice, the
awkward situation in which this fatal inequality
puts me, and realise that in refusing to appoint
seconds I cannot give as a reason my celestial nature,—it
would be unprecedented."</p>

<p>"Monsieur," replied the heir of the Bussart
d'Esparvieu, "you should have thought of that
before you insulted me."</p>

<p>Out he marched haughtily; but no sooner was
he in the street than he staggered like a drunken
man. The rain was still falling. He walked
unseeing, unhearing, at haphazard, dragging his
feet in the gutters through pools of water, through
heaps of mud. He followed the outer boulevards
for a long time, and at length, fordone with weariness,
lay down on the edge of a piece of waste land.
He was muddied up to the eyes, mud and tears
smeared his face, the brim of his hat was dripping
with rain. A passer-by, taking him for a beggar,
tossed him a copper. He picked it up, put it carefully
in his waistcoat pocket, and set off to find his
seconds.</p>



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
